__Human beings, who's everyday experience is that anything in their immediate surroundings is controlled either by themselves or by other human beings, tend to think that everything is controlled (or at least controllable) by human beings.__

This really sounds trivial, doesn't it? And maybe it is. But even if it is, that doesn't make it meaningful. First of all, if the presupposition is true only for a small minority, it doesn't really matter. Secondly, is the conclusion really true? I suggest, the presupposition is true for most of us. And the conclusion, I think, too.

I'll make a small excursion to examine the validity of the presupposition. In the decades after the second world war, there was an explosion of technological and economic progress, creating a surge of utopian views of the near future. The visions of the future from the 1950s and 60s are still unsurpassed. Not only would we conquer space, have settlements on other planets, be served by robots, and fly to work in our private mini-helicopters. We would also be controlling weather and climate. Natural materials such as wood or cotton would be replaced with synthetic ones, which would be much better. We would overcome diseases and regulate our mental states using harmless drugs. We would slow down aging, postpone death. This was all not considered to be fantasy, it was just a matter of time before it actually happened. And time didn't mean a thousand years. It meant decades. This may all seem very naive today, but that's not the point. The point is the common factor, and what's behind all these visions. We had overcome nature.

We have overcome nature. At last. After millennia of struggling, we have finally overcome nature. I don't mean this as a fact, obviously it's not a fact, it's what in German is called a Vorstellung, an idea / a perception / a notion, and as such it's just as powerful as a fact. To be more precise, it's the Vorstellung of being independent of nature. And what carries this very fundamental Vorstellung is our everyday experience. Nature simply doesn't have a role to play there anymore. Only we do. Nothing else.

If I want water, I open the tab, if I want my house warm, I turn on the heat. If it doesn't work, I call the plumber. I drive or take a ride to the supermarket to buy food, or I go out, or I call a service. I get my clothes from a shop, out of polyester, microplastics, or cotton, I may notice that, I may not, they come from this or that industry, this or that part of the world, I should find them all in the right shop. Everyday life is full of things we expect to control completely. 

But it's not true for everything. Do I control the weather? Me personally, definitely not. Which doesn't mean that there aren't conspiracy theories about the "government" controlling the weather. The belief that we could control it, if we wanted, is probably not that uncommon. In any case, the weather is just an inconvenience. And even if we don't really control everything, what we do not control is not supposed to have an impact. Think about the outrage in the supermarket when shelves are empty, for whatever reason, a strike, a storm, a pandemic. They are supposed to be full anyway. Think about the anger at the authorities when a natural disaster has happened. Why weren't we warned in time, why is the infrastructure not good enough to withstand a disaster, there must at the very least be negligence, cheating, incompetence, stupidity at play. Sure, that could be the case. There is almost always some amount of negligence, cheating, incompetence, or stupidity at play. What I'm trying to point out is the general assumption that we always should have everything under control. If not, it's a human failure. And although we don't (yet) control our mental states using harmless drugs, again, there are countless conspiracy theories flourishing about how vaccines, electricity, telecommunications, WLAN, whatever are being used to take control over us.


__Human beings, who think that everything is controllable by human beings, tend to think there exists nothing superior to human beings. And if there is nothing superior to them, there is nothing or no one to correct them, to tell them that they are wrong. This goes for nature as well as for science, history, truth, or reality.__

To use a metaphor: we are experiencing a Copernican U-turn. If Copernicus used scientific observations to show that the sun wasn't rotating around the earth, but the other way around, thus causing the Copernican turn, today, as we are independent of nature, who gives a shit? It doesn't matter what rotates around what, or what "science" says about that, we're in the middle anyway. 

There is a fundamental difference between living with the notion of being dependent of nature (or, indeed, of anything) and being independent. That, which you are dependent of, is obviously superior to you. It can correct you. If you have the everyday experience of something that is superior to you, it means there is a reality above your control, and you simply have to respect that. Or you will perish. It means, you will have to respect a truth beyond your control, or you will be corrected. On the other hand, if there is nothing superior to you - or if you live with the Vorstellung, there is nothing superior to you - why would you respect a "reality" that doesn't suit you? Why would you accept what others state as the truth, it's just their truth, and they are not really superior to you. 


__Human beings, thinking there exists nothing superior to human beings, tend to have a need for something superior.__

This on the one hand brings us back to conspiracy theories. On the other hand, and for now more importantly, it brings us to authoritarianism. Having nothing above you, nothing or no one that can correct you, can certainly make you very insecure. The total reflexivity of culture (Habermas) means that it's all up to us. We have to deal with it. We have to take care of it. We have to make the decisions. Put in the work. But I can't. I don't know how. I can't deal with it. How great wouldn't it be if someone came along who had the answers. Who knew what to do. Who could fix it.


__Human beings, thinking there exists nothing superior to human beings, are left with nothing to fight but each other.__

This makes me wanna cry. But let's examine it anyway. We have always been fighting each other, haven't we? That's nothing new. True. But something has changed. The very basic thing of having to work together to overcome obstacles has lost some of its momentum. Nothing units us more than a common enemy. But the natural enemy is gone. We have to look for other enemies. I don't wish to pursue this any further. It makes me feel bad.

If these four statements are true, it means that a basically very good thing: to have control of our everyday life, something we always aspired and that we couldn't and wouldn't part with, leads directly to conspiracy theories, loss of truth, authoritarianism, and hatred. If that is true, how could we not despair? On the other hand, if it is true, we need to realize it as true. Otherwise, we will never find a way to work against it. The trouble is, I have no clue how.

